# How do we study Computer Systems?

## Admin

- make sure you have a grading contract repo
- you'll track your progress in your

## Systems


## Abstraction

The advantage to assembly is that it is hardware independent and human readable. It is low level and limited to what the hardware *can* do, but it is a version of that that can be run on different hardware.
```{warning}
This is incomplete, will come back and fill in later
```


## Using the simulator

On MacOS:

```bash
cd path/nand2tetris/tools
bash CPUEmulator.sh
```

On Windows:
Double click on the CPUEmulator.bat file


We're going to use the test cases from the book's project 5:

1. Load Program
1. Navigate to nand2tetris/projects/05

We're not going to *do* project 5, which is to build a CPU, but instead to use the test.

For more on how the emulator works see the [CPU Emulator Tutorial](https://www.nand2tetris.org/_files/ugd/44046b_24b3a15aa628404fbf6dacd86d7da3af.pdf).

For much more detail about how this all works [chapter 4](https://www.nand2tetris.org/_files/ugd/44046b_d70026d8c1424487a451eaba3e372132.pdf) of the related text book has description of the machine code and assembly language.


## How does the computer actually add constants?

We'll use add.hack first.  

This program adds constants, 2+3.  

It is a program, assembly code that we are loading to the simulator's ROM, which is memory that gets read only by the CPU.  

Run the simulator and watch what each line of the program does.  

Notice the following:
- to compute with a constant, that number only exists in ROM in the instructions
- to write a value to memory the address register first has to be pointed to what where in the memory the value will go, then the value can be sent there


The simulator has a few key parts:
- address register
- program counter

If you prefer to read, see [section 5.2.1- 5.2.6 of nan2tetris book](https://www.nand2tetris.org/_files/ugd/44046b_b2cad2eea33847869b86c541683551a7.pdf)

- This program the first instruction puts 2 in the address register from the instructions in ROM.  
- Then it moves the 2 through the ALU to the data register (D)
- then it puts 3 on the address register
- then it adds the numbers at D and A
- then it puts 0 on the address register
- then it write the output from the ALU (D) to memory (at the location indicated by the A register)

```{admonition} Try if yourself
- What line do you change to change where it outputs the data?
- How could you add a third number?
- How could you add two pairs, saving the intermediate numbers?
- How could you do (4+4)*(3+2)?
```




## Hardware Overview


```{important}
Today is the first day outside of the grade free zone.
```

## Review today's class
(required for a C or better)

```{include} ../_review/2022-09-26.md
```

## Prepare for Next Class
(required for a C or better)


```{include} ../_practice/2022-09-26.md
```

```{warning}
the template contracts in the repo have an error in them; use the ones on the [course website](https://introcompsys.github.io/fall2022/syllabus/contract.html).
```

## More Practice

(mostly required for a B or better)

```{include} ../_practice/2022-09-26.md
```



## Questions After Class

• more about the hardware architecture abstractions

• When requesting a review for a PR or something similar, would the only thing to do be attaching either you the professor or the teachers assistant?
With our collaborative repo, would we facilitate the merges and reviews or would you need to have the last review of the information?
Should we assume that when you ask to write a document, we should create a markdown file with a similar name (as opposed to an assignment with the description "add branches.md to your KWL repo")

• Are there other simulators that we can play with?

• for my grading contract if i choose to go for an A and stick with the A but don't meet the requirements how much is my grade affected

• how the CPU performs addition and stores the result in a memory location on the RAM

• Explain more levels of abstraction and how they are connected
