# Review and Logistics

## Checker action

I created a branch `checkaction`; merge it into  your main branch to be able to run the action form the actions tab.

## IDEA

You get a small number of free corrections if 75% of the students respond to the survey.

## Final Due Date

11/19 is the last time to submit any work.

## Review Questions

### How are number systems chosen ?

- [ ] the optimal one for each scenario is evaluated
- [ ] they are cultural artifacts
- [ ] the only systems are decimal (10 fingers) and binary (on/off)



### What happens in linking?

- [ ] code from includes is copied into the file
- [ ] binaries for compiled libraries is combined with the compiled program code
- [ ] code is translated from assembly to machine code
- [ ] code is translated from a high level language to assembly


###  How can we figure out what gates to use to a calculation?

- [ ] memorize them
- [ ] experiment
- [ ] compare logic tables




### What are three factors that you could use to choose the right langague for a project?

_assuming you know or have time and motivation to learn many languages_

### What types of problems would you look for if you got a linking error?



### What is the relationship between a half adder and a full adder?

- [ ] a half adder adds half of the bits in the register and the full adds all
- [ ] a half adder adds two one bit numbers into a two bit number; a full adder adds two one bit numbers and a carry bit into a one bit output and a carry bit
- [ ] a half adder adds two one bit numbers into 1 bit; a full adder adds two one bit numbers into two bits
## Review today's class

```{include} ../_review/2022-12-07.md
```



## Prepare for Next Class

```{include} ../_prepare/2022-12-07.md
```



## More Practice

```{include} ../_practice/2022-12-07.md
```

