
# How can I use GitHub offline? 

## Get Organized

Opening different terminals
- terminal app on mac, use the `bash` command to use bash (zsh will be mostly the same; it's derivative, but to ensure exactly the same as mine use bash)
- use gitbash on Windows


We can move around and examine the computer's file structure using shell commands.

`cd` is for change directory.  We can use the relative path to get to where we
want to go.  We can see what files and folder are at our curent location with `ls`
if we need a reference.


```bash
cd Documents/inclass/
```
We can use ls in the folder we get to.  I chose to go to a place where I save
content I use during my classes that I teach.

```bash
ls
```
I already have a folder for the other class:

```bash
prog4ds
```

I need a folder for this class, so I will make one with `mkdir`

```bash
mkdir systems

```

To view where we are, we **p**rint **w**orking **d**irectory

```bash
pwd
```

It prints out the *absolute* path, that begins with a `/` above, we used a relative
path, from the home directory.

```bash
/Users/brownsarahm/Documents/inclass

```

```{admonition} Checkin
What is the absolute path of the home directory?
```

Next I will go into the folder I just made
```bash
cd systems/

```

## Issues and Commits

create a [test repo for today's class](https://classroom.github.com/a/U9WXbUBo)


First we're going to see how issues and commits relate.

Let's create the README  on github and make a pull request with `closes #1` in the PR
message.



Notice what happened:
- the file is added and the commit has the the message
- the issue is closed
- if we go look at the closed issues, we can see on the issue that it was linked
- from the issue, we can see what the changes were that made are supposed to relate to this
- we can still comment on an issue that is already closed.


## Authenticating with GitHub and cloning a repo

We have two choices to Download a repository:
1. clone to maintain a link using git
1. download zip to not have to use git, but have no link



For a public repo, it won't matter, you can use any way to download it that you wuold like, but for a private repo, we need to be authenticated.  

Depending on how you have authenticated with GitHub, a different version of the URL will be highlighted.

For today, if you have ssh keys already set up, use that.


### Authenticating with GitHub

There are many ways to authenticate securely with GitHub and other git clients.  We're going to use *easier* ones for today, but we'll come back to the third, which is a bit more secure and is a more general type of authentication.

1. GitHub CLI: enter the following and follow the prompts.

    ```
    gh auth login
    ```
1. [personal access token](https://docs.github.com/en/authentication/keeping-your-account-and-data-secure/creating-a-personal-access-token). This is a special one time password that you can use like a password, but it is limited in scope and will expire (as long as you choose settings well)
1. ssh keys
1. GitBash built in authentication



Or we can use use the GitHub CLI tool to authenticate.

On Mac with GitHub CLI:
```bash
gh auth login
```

On Windows, Try the clone step and then follow the authentication instructions.

On Mac, clone after you are all logged in.

````{margin}
```{warning}
My repository, like yours, is private so copying these lines directly will not work.  You will have to replace my GitHub username with your own.
```
````

```bash
git clone https://github.com/introcompsys/github-inclass-brownsarahm.git
```

````{margin}
git tells us exactly what happened:
````

```
Cloning into 'github-inclass-brownsarahm'...
remote: Enumerating objects: 9, done.
remote: Counting objects: 100% (9/9), done.
remote: Compressing objects: 100% (6/6), done.
remote: Total 9 (delta 0), reused 4 (delta 0), pack-reused 0
Receiving objects: 100% (9/9), done.

```
We can also see that it created a new folder:

```bash
ls
```


```
github-inclass-brownsarahm
```

## What is in a repo?

We can enter that folder
```bash
cd github-inclass-brownsarahm/
```

and see what is inside
```bash
ls
```


```
README.md
```
Notice that the `.github/workflows` that we see on GitHub is missing,
that is because it is hidden.  All file names that start with `.` are hidden.

the `-a` option allows us to see them
```bash
ls -a
```

We also see some special "files", `.` the current location and `..` up one directory

```
.		..		.git		.github		README.md
```

## Relative paths

We can see clearly where `..` goes by printing our our location before and
after changing directory to `..`

```bash
pwd
```


```
/Users/brownsarahm/Documents/inclass/systems/github-inclass-brownsarahm
```


```bash
cd ..
pwd
```


```
/Users/brownsarahm/Documents/inclass/systems
```

## Adding a file from the command line
First back to the repo directory
```bash
cd github-inclass-brownsarahm/
```

We will make an empty file for now, using `touch`

```bash
touch about.md
```


```bash
ls
```
We can se the two folders

```
README.md	about.md
```

We can see the file, but what does git know?

```bash
git status
```


```
On branch main
Your branch is up to date with 'origin/main'.

Untracked files:
  (use "git add <file>..." to include in what will be committed)
	about.md

nothing added to commit but untracked files present (use "git add" to track)
```

First we have to add it to a staging are to make a batch of files (or only one)
that will commit.

```bash
git add .
```

THen we check in with git again
```bash
git status
```


```
On branch main
Your branch is up to date with 'origin/main'.

Changes to be committed:
  (use "git restore --staged <file>..." to unstage)
	new file:   about.md

```
THen we can commit the file

```bash
git commit -m "create about"
```

Git returns to us the commit number, with the message and a summary
```
[main 3c9980a] create about
 1 file changed, 0 insertions(+), 0 deletions(-)
 create mode 100644 about.md
```
and again checkin

```bash
git status
```


```
On branch main
Your branch is ahead of 'origin/main' by 1 commit.
  (use "git push" to publish your local commits)

nothing to commit, working tree clean
```

Now we see that the local copy is ahead of GitHub (aka origin), so we need to
push to make the changes go to GitHub.

```bash
git push

```


```
Enumerating objects: 4, done.
Counting objects: 100% (4/4), done.
Delta compression using up to 8 threads
Compressing objects: 100% (2/2), done.
Writing objects: 100% (3/3), 307 bytes | 307.00 KiB/s, done.
Total 3 (delta 0), reused 0 (delta 0), pack-reused 0
To https://github.com/introcompsys/github-inclass-brownsarahm.git
   ec3dd02..3c9980a  main -> main
(base) brownsarahm@github-inclass-brownsarahm $

```

## Review
```{include} ../_review/2022-09-14.md
```




## Prepare
```{include} ../_prepare/2022-09-14.md
```




## More Practice
```{include} ../_practice/2022-09-14.md
```


## Questions at the end of class


• can you add additional arguments to most git commands? ex git commit -...

• why can't we make all of these files on github instead of using gitbash?

• is there any advantages to using the github website vs using the github commands on your terminal

• One question I have is, how would I edit a text file using bash

• When working with a team what are ways we can prevent merging conflicts?

• will we do the bulk of our work in-console or in an IDE, or a mix of both?

• none

• If we are confused about what is due for next class, which locations should we look? I think right now there are multiple, unless I am wrong about that.

• I accidentally used the push command before the config command. Is that a problem? Is there anything I have to change?
